Motivation:
My research work has been focused on the development of new devices and methods for cancer diagnostics. This made me particularly aware about the importance of using ad-hoc diagnostics to drive personalized therapy. Several new targeted drugs are being tested as alternatives to the more traditional surgery and chemotherapy approaches. These drugs are being examined singularly and in combination in extensive clinical trials worldwide. It is therefore imperative that trial efforts are coordinated and organized to gain the maximum amount of knowledge in the shortest time possible. We can learn from trial information and we can greatly improve policy making at every level of the clinical trial organization to achieve these goals.

Data source:
Opentrials.net “aims to locate, match, and share all publicly accessible data and documents, on all trials conducted, on all medicines and other treatments, globally”. They have collected 38GB of trial data from international sources. The data includes important information regarding location and institution of the trial as well as number of patients involved. More importantly, each record describes the condition and the tested intervention and references related publications. Both currently running trials and terminated ones are collected with information about their success or failure.

Data analysis: 
The data is readily accessible through API searches based on targeted queries. For this work, I concentrated on colorectal cancer.  Colorectal cancer is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths, with about 200,000 yearly cases in U.S. alone. The database returns about 5000 records for “colorectal AND cancer”. The first plot shows a general analysis of the data to establish the yearly distribution of the trials as well as their country of origin. The trials are sorted by year of establishment. The number of trials increases steadily until 2012, though part of this increase could be due to the introduction of new digital reporting requirements that could skew the yearly distribution. The number of trials dips sharply in 2015-2017. This is possibly due to sparser and less updated data collection for most recent trials. I then analyzed the contribution of different countries to the data, concentrating on the 6 most active countries. U.S. shows the highest fraction of trials in most years, though this might be partly skewed by the data availability and the Opentrials organization. The rapid ascent of trials in Japan is extremely interesting and would command a more thorough investigation to verify the causes. Also of interest is the boom of trials in China that correspond well with their increase in scientific production. It would be particularly interesting to verify if the increase of trial number reflects an increased incidence of colorectal cancer in these two states.
A smaller portion of this data was analyzed more carefully in plot 2. I queried for the drug Bevacizumab in combination with colorectal cancer. This drug is most commonly used for treatment of colorectal cancer. The graph was generated by organizing trial entries as a network structure of trial-condition-intervention and plotted using Gephi. The graph shows a main core of interconnected nodes with few satellites of single trials. As expected, the two query terms are  the biggest nodes in the graph. A satellite group of trials shown, target the metastatic effects of the main cancer. When we look at the intervention, Bevacizumab is clustered  close to a group of other targeted drugs, indicating that this set of drugs was possibly used in combination in the same trial. The combination of targeted drugs, depending on the stage of the disease, is becoming a new paradigm in cancer therapy.

Challenges:
The trial data come from different sources and is clearly affected by non-homogeneous reporting standards. The data needs to be filtered for content that has slightly different naming schemes and thus causes duplicates in the node structure. (Deliverable 1)

Ideas and future work:
This preliminary work was extremely useful in assessing the quality and kind of data available. I found extremely interesting, the chance of analyzing successful trials (and their publication record) together with failed ones. It would be of great interest to model the chances of success (or failure) of a trial using other parameters, such as involved institutions (and countries), number of participants, etc. Such a tool could indicate what makes  a potential successful recipe for a clinical trial as well as provide a realistic timeline for its development. (Deliverable 2) Finally, I found another interesting database containing cancer-related patent applications. This database is more difficult to dissect because the information is mostly textual and the keywords are often less clear. But the combination of the two would provide great insight into the direction in which the cancer diagnostics and treatment market is taking. (Deliverable 3)
